---
layout: post
title: What key be to lock
date:   2023-01-20 10:11:04 -0400
categories: melody
---

The notes in a given major scale all sound good together. If all the notes of a song are in a certain major scale, then we can say the song is in that scale's key. For example, a song that uses only D, E, F#, G, A, B, and C# will be in the key of D.

When notating a song in D, you usually wouldn't write a sharp sign next to every F# and C#. You'd put those two sharps right at the beginning of the piece, in what's called the **key signature**.

{% lilypond alt: "" trim: true %}
  \relative {
    \key d \major
    e''8 fis fis e fis4 r
  } 
  \addlyrics {
    Wait -- in' on the day
  }
{% endlilypond %}

If you see a key signature like the one above, with those two sharps, then it means every time you see an F or a C, it's really F# or C# unless explicitly indicated otherwise.

The notes in a scale are also called scale **degrees**. So in the key of G, A is the second scale degree, F# is the seventh, etc.

A **key** is the context that gives each note is emotional quality. So for example in the key of E, the note E sounds pleasant, stable, and resolved. That's because it's the first scale degree, also called the **tonic**.

[example: sometimes i feel like i don't have a partner]

Listen to the words "like" and "have" and the second syllable of "partner." Those are the E's. They sound so well-adjusted.

But if you play an E in the key of F, that same pitch E will sound tense and unstable. In F, E is the seventh scale degree. It's located one quick half step below F, which gives it a quality of reaching up, like it anxiously wants to resolve upward to the tonic. That's why in classical jargon it's called the **leading tone**. It leads your ear back home to 1.

Imagine if Paul McCartney ended the bridge of Yesterday (which is in F) on the second syllable of "yesterday," which is the note E:

[example]

It sounds maddening. But that tension nicely sets up the return to the tonic F in the final syllable of the word:

[example]

Then the melody finally feels resolved. (For a brief moment, before Paul tumbles back down the scale.)

It's these kinds of pitch relationships that give melodies their sense of directed motion and evoke feelings of tension and resolution. This is the tip of a big berg.